Today is July 30, 1980. This is Terry Anderson.
We're talking to General Joe Hanover about his
military career. This is our second interview.
15th of February, 1941, you went active duty.
That's right. Could you tell us about that? You
were assigned to the 54th Coastal Artillery.
Could you tell us about that duty? Yeah. I'll
precede that just a little bit. A month or six weeks
before February 15, I got this alert letter. And it
said that I was being considered for recall for
called active duty. And that's the question that I
have any civilian pursuits that would prevent my
being recalled or, or was available for a year's
duty. I had no civilian pursuits that were
considered as
exempt from military duty. So I answered in the
affirmative and very shortly thereafter I got a
copy of a letter ordering me to active duty at Camp
Wallace, Hitchcock, Texas with the 54th Coastal
Artillery and had Perences colored. That sounds
very strange today because it was an all-Negro
organization with white officers. It was just
being formed. It was picked up the name of an old
World War I artillery unit, so it was a revived
number. There were a great many cadremen who had
had several years of Army duty who were made the
non-commissioned officers in the Corps of the of
the organization, enlisted men or raw recruits
who had just maybe had their basic or very limited
amount of training. Were they all Texans? No. No,
they were from everywhere, all over. We initially
set up The organization had headquarters in the
basement of the Galvez Hotel in Galveston, Texas.
Camp Wallace was not completed at that time. It was
out some, oh, 15, 18 miles from Galveston. But as
many people remember, prior to World War II, the
Department of the Army went into quite a building
program of camps and cantonments for this
organization. buildup of military forces. So
Camp Wallace was under construction.
The headquarters was in the Galvez. And once we got
in and got settled, we started a
orientation and somewhat of a program of
instruction for officers out at Port Crockett,
which was on the south end of Galveston Island.
That was an old established Coastal Artillery
emplacement. We had a few regular Army officers,
one or two West Pointers, and of course our
commanding officer and several of the officers
who had former, I mean who were on active duty at the
time. So we spent the first month or six weeks in
study and schooling learning how to be officers on
active duty and this sort of thing. Why do you think
that they picked you to be an officer in a black
unit? Well, I think as it turned out, whatever
motivated them to do it or whatever guidelines
they used apparently were sound. Most of the
officers were from this part of the country. From
Texas or from the South? Well, most of them were
from Texas. Most of them were from, I'd say the vast
majority were from the South, but most of the vast
majority were from Texas. And a great many of them,
in fact about 60%, were recently graduated Aggies
or Aggies who had graduated some years before. I
think it was because they knew we understood those
people a little better. We associated with them,
and I think it turned out to be a fact. We had good
rapport with them. We understood them and knew
what their limitations and capabilities were,
and we used them in those areas. And as the record of
all black units went, I think we had a pretty good
one. Was there any times, do you remember any
incidents when there were any, what we'd call
today race relation problems? We had really no
problem much until we got up to North Carolina. We
stayed in Fort, in Camp Wallace from, oh, sometime
in March to June, and then we were transferred to
Camp Davis, North Carolina. Now, even though that
was a southern state, as far as integration, or
there was no integration at that time, but as far as
the geographical division of the country goes,
North Carolina was a southern state. And there
were 10,000 colored troops in Camp Davis. And the
nearest town was Wilmington. And Wilmington only
had about 10,000 people. and really the only place
for recreation was Wilmington, and that posed a
problem. The police of Wilmington had
considerable problems with, well they'd have had
problems with that many soldiers of any kind, but
there were just no facilities for that number of
black people in a town of 10,000 people. So there
were a good many problems. Can you describe some of
these problems? Well they were, you know, Lots of
drunken disorderly and lots of objection on the
part of the local citizens from the standpoint of
coming into the businesses. At that time, they
didn't want them in the restaurants. They didn't
want them in the motel. Didn't have them. And they
resented it, being soldiers of the United States,
and rightfully so, probably. So that type of
thing. gave the police a great deal of problems. We
had a standing procedure where the officers on
duty would have to go into Wilmington and ride and
assist the police in reconnaissance and just
general overseeing of the situation and helping
with crowd control and this sort of thing. So there
were problems but not really to the extent that
we've had some some so-called riots in the last few
years right right right how how many what were your
responsibilities and how many men did you have
under your command well i was in a company yeah when
i went there as a as a company officer there were as i
remember some 150 soldiers in the company My
responsibility at that time was communications.
If we went out on the bivouac, we set up the
communications, the telephones, the
communications to the gun emplacements,
communications to battalion headquarters, that
sort of thing, and also communication training. I
was also the company supply officer, which
handled all the supplies that came in. Each
officer had several duties. But very shortly
thereafter, I was assigned as assistant
regimental motor officer, which meant that I was
responsible for the maintenance and upkeep,
third and fourth echelon maintenance of all
vehicles in the whole regiment. So it was a
regimental assignment from then on. Why did they
give that to you? Did they think, well, you were an
engineer, and therefore you might know something
about motors? Oh, probably. Probably. And they
asked me, you know, if my background would lend
itself. Or, you know, a lot of times before they
signed somebody back then, they'd ask you, you
know, how you thought you could fit in there, or
whether you didn't want to sign anybody that was
absolutely opposed, even though You didn't have
the fatal say. A fellow fits a whole lot better if
he's agreeable. Absolutely. So I was somewhat
maintenance inclined. So I was happy to get the
job. Do you remember what your thoughts were when
you were assigned to Camp Wallace and you realized
that you were going to be an officer with a black
unit? Do you remember what you thought? Thank you,
ma'am. I had lived and worked and been around them
all my life. And I really had no second thoughts
about signing with a black outfit. I always felt
like that I had good rapport with them. I had over
the years. Now there were a lot of A lot of officers
assigned to them were absolutely opposed to it.
They fought it to, you know, and many of them got
transferred. Oh, really? Yes. And it's probably
better because if they were, if they were, they had
their mind made up that they didn't want to serve
like that, they would have never made good
officers in that outfit because we had to do a great
deal of the work of noncommissioned officers.
because the educational level, the level of
comprehension of those people was way low. And we
just had to do a lot of work that a non-commissioned
officer of more education and more know-how would
be able to do. That's right. Now, when you were down
in Camp Wallace, you said in North Carolina there
were some problems. Were there any problems in
Texas? Well, really, we were just receiving these
troops. Oh, I see. We never did get our full
complement until we got to North Carolina.
By the time we got ready to move to North Carolina,
we probably had, I would guess, 2,000 in the
organization. But there were some of the same
problems in and around Galveston and Hitchcock
and Texas City. There was Houston that was a short
ways away that they could share on weekends. And
Houston could accommodate a great many more
people than other smaller places. And then the
concentration of soldiers around that area was
not 10,000 on 10,000 population. So it was a
completely different situation.
What about white officers? and other white
outfits. Were there any problems between a black
outfit and white outfits, or did they ever work
together at any time? I mean, did they ever have
exercises? Well, I'm sure they did. We did not. We
had missions on the seacoast, and we did not work
really side by side with any other white
organizations. Now we were always in the same,
many times we were in the same camps with them, or
forts or whatever, and there was some animosity a
lot of times in that respect, but we were not really
associated with too many other organizations,
black or white. You went out to California, and was
this with the same outfit then? That's right. And
how were the Californians? toward the black
soldiers? Oh, there was an entirely different
situation than there was in Texas. They were not
really segregated out there. They could go in
establishments that could not go in back here, and
it really made some difference. In what way? Well,
I guess the soldiers themselves felt a little bit
more wanted and a little bit more at home where they
were more recognized. It's just a difference. Now
for 20 years we've had the rise of a black power
movement in the society and I was wondering if you
sensed any unrest among the blacks that you worked
with during the year? Not really. It was too early
probably. That's right. And they had a very
commendable sense of duty to country, at least the
vast majority of them did. They were fulfilling a
job for the defense of their country. And I doubt
that we had any more that were what you'd call
unfaithful
than they had in white outfits. Really? That's
right. Listen, I found years ago that when a black
man learns a skill or he learns something that he
can be used and be proud of, he is proud, with
exception, of course. One good example, one of my
responsibilities later on was
teaching survey crews. as I indicated, surveying
in baselines and whatnot. For the highway? No, for
the Coast Artillery guns. I see. For the
measurements and whatnot. We had to have survey
crews, and I'd teach these boys enough surveying
to where they could run an instrument or figure a
few angles and figure little calculations. We
even did a very intricate thing of what is termed in
surveying is shooting Polaris. In other words, to
orient a position, you set up and orient true north
by looking at the North Star. And of course, it
revolves in an elliptical circle. But you set up at
night, and you set your instrument on the North
Star, and you calculate these deviations, and
then you establish a true north-south line. And we
taught them, and we did this. And that was the
proudest survey crew you ever did see, to know that
they had, as they called it, shootin' Polaris. The
point is, when they learned a skill or learned a
trade, they were proud of it. But they were good
soldiers. We had exceptionally good ones. You
mentioned their duty, their feeling of duty. I've
read a number of times the autobiography of
Malcolm X and other radical blacks who, during the
Second World War, they thought that other blacks
who went into the war were fools because they were
fighting against tyranny overseas when there was
tyranny or segregation at home. But you never saw
any of that. You never got any of that while you were
in charge, while you were in the Army. Of course, we
didn't take the black boys overseas. I was only
with them in the States. There were a number of them
that went overseas, of course. But I did not go
overseas with them. But I would say I did not see
that at all in this organization.
They were very commendable soldiers. Now, I have
one last question about this topic, and that is I
know that you grew up with sharecroppers, but did
commanding or being in command of a crew of black
soldiers during the war, did that change your
thoughts about black Americans in any way? No. You
know, a strange thing about it, we had them, we had
them four years, and about the end of that time,
they began to assign a few black officers, black
second-tenants. They were beginning to graduate
from OCSs. And this may sound strange, but I had
many of them tell me that they did not want to be
commanded by black officers. They'd much rather
had white officers. Why was that? I don't know,
unless it was a feeling of lack of ability and lack
of confidence in their leadership. I really don't
know. But I know I've had many of them ask me, as
these black officers began to be assigned to this
unit, would they someday have all black officers?
Of course, I didn't know. tell them I thought it'd
be a long while and each time the comment was well we
hope not. Do you think that was a general feeling or
was that you think that that was a feeling for you
maybe they respected you as an individual? No I
think I think the other officers had the same
feeling now the of course it may have been the ones
who were
in the area of knowing their responsibility and
feeling that they wanted to do a good job, and they
were afraid that the leadership of the blacks
would not give them a good job they wanted. And I'm
not sure. But each and every time that question was
asked of me, their response was, well, they had
rather have the white officers. Now, that might
not be the case today. Yeah, what do you think we're
doing? This was a good many years ago. That's very
interesting. Now, right after the war, of course,
in about 1948, President Truman signed the
executive order which integrated the armed
forces. What was your feeling about that? What can
I say? Too bad you can't join us. Let me put it this
way. I grew up in the South. I grew up serving,
working, and playing, and dealing with blacks all
my life. My feeling was, and I said this many times
back there, that the best utilization of the
blacks would have been in an integrated
condition. Because of this lack of their feeling
of sense of responsibility to others and the fact
that their leadership abilities are not about it
or were not as high as as the same number of white
people and it's uh it may be partly because they
didn't want to assume leadership it may have been
partly because they weren't capable
the better way to use I think you
use their efficiency a whole lot better if you can
mix them together and that way you so-called raise
the capability level. What do you think was the
impact of Truman's order on the reserves? You were
in the reserves at that time. Well, I don't
remember specifically, except that, you know,
that never bothered me at all. Well, I mean, did the
reserves now start accepting blacks in
integrated units? Oh, yeah. Did the number of
blacks in your unit, for example, start to grow?
Not really, because they were really not
interested in getting in the reserve nearly as
much as the whites for, I guess, a variety of
reasons. I'm not real sure.
one thing may have been that they were out trying to
get started in life and didn't could not get time
off for reserves or it may have been that they they
may have felt that they would still be
discriminated against I'm not real sure of what
but the number of blacks was very very low in the
reserve even on you retired in 1971 that's right oh
no no I'm talking about Back then, but yes, I know,
but did it start to grow? Oh yes, oh yeah. By the time
I retired, there were many blacks in the reserve.
In fact, when I retired, we had a major at that time,
a black major on my staff. Very fine offshore. But
we had lots of blacks. We had lots of good blacks.
It may sound fun to say good blacks, but you know, in
the terminology we're using, that's not a strange
comment. But I've always had a warm place in my
heart for a man that's capable. I don't really care
what color he is. Right, yeah. When I worked for the
highway department, we've got some blacks that,
gosh, you know, as fine a people as we had anywhere.
And we had some of them in this black unit I had. I had
some mechanics when I ran this motor maintenance
shop that I'd put with anybody's mechanics
anywhere in the world. I actually believe they'd
have jumped off the cliff for me. I used to get in a
bind and get a lot of vehicles that were down or
disabled or whatever. If I asked them to work all
night, you know, they would never say a word about
it. Just what I asked them to do, they'd do. Of
course, I was usually out there, you know, usually
there with them, but I've always had great
admiration for capable people. I don't care what
color they are. Why were you transferred from
Coastal Artillery to the Corps of Engineers in
1944? Well, Coastal Artillery, Seacoast
Artillery, was losing its identity, so to speak,
because there was not much danger at that time of
any invasion in the United States. And our mission
up to that time had been seacoast protection in
california and they were phasing out artillery
outfits and seacoast in particular all of the old
permanent emplacements along the coast of fort
scott uh fort macarthur down at san diego and the
same in the los angeles area those were were being
phased out because I presume intelligence said
there would be no invasion of the United States. So
the unit that we were in was transferred back to the
east and were converted into combat engineer
battalions and whatnot. And then they did not send
any of we officers to be assigned with those units.
All those boys would were going back for training
as combat engineers. So the officers...
Josiah. These officers were being relieved from
the units, and then we were assigned to various
organizations within our own branches. So when
that happened, I thought it was time for me to get
back in the Corps of Engineers where I really
belonged. So I made an application to be
transferred back to the Corps of Engineers. I
stayed back to the Corps of Engineers and was
fortunate in getting that assignment and I went
then into engineer units. Okay, what was your duty
then in 1944 and 1945?
After being relieved of this artillery unit, I was
assigned to a, to a white engineer group. Very
shortly thereafter, the group commander wanted
to send me to Fort Belvoir for retread engineer
training, even though I was an engineer officer, I
mean an engineer by profession. He wanted me to go
back to Fort Belvoir and take a refresher course in
army engineering tactics and procedures and
whatnot. So without really having any duties in
the white outfit, I went back to Fort Belvoir for
six weeks and then came back to the same unit. And at
that time then, I was assigned to take a company
overseas. Yes, sir. And let me tell you a funny
thing about that assignment. Excuse me just a
minute. I want you to cut that off. I want you to meet
my daughter before she leaves. This peculiar
thing about my assignment to this engineer
company.
When I was in A&M, one of the what we called TAC
officers, one of the officers who was the regular
army who monitored the ROTC program out there, was
named Johnson, D.T. Johnson. And his trademark
was this hook pipe that he smoked. Everybody knew
Colonel Johnson. And he wore little boots. Of
course, engineers have always worn boots near
that, you know, that's a trademark. But he was most
un-military looking, had a posture that's sort of
like a duck when you walk in this crooked pipe when
you were a captain. Everybody knew Colonel
Johnson. So I was summonsed over to this group
headquarters to be interviewed to take on this new
assignment. They told me that Colonel Johnson
wanted to talk with me. Didn't dawn on me who
Colonel Johnson was. I walked in this office And
it's Colonel D.T. Johnson, who I had known as a
captain at A&M, hadn't seen him since. And he was
the regimental command, the group commander,
calling me in to interview me about taking this
company that he was fixing to send to Europe. He
picked me because I was an Aggie. Really? That's
what he told me. Did he remember you at all? No. He
just had too many men under his wing. That's right.
But he told me that he looked through the files of
the available officers. See, I'd just been
assigned to the thing, and I was not in the
established command structure. And he said he
felt like he could assign me better than he could
pull an officer out who had been assigned and been
running a company because I was available and had
not been assigned. But he said, also, I noticed you
were from A&M, and I have great respect for A&M
officers. That's what he told me. Now, he may have
been just trying to justify sending me to Europe,
you know. But he told me that he had a company that
had a 60-day sailing date. It was a good company,
but it had had a weak company commander. And that he
wanted to sign me that company to go to Europe. And
he was right. It was a good company, and I could tell
that it had had weak leadership. But the point of my
story was, here I run into a fellow that I'd known
down at A&M. Never thought about him being a full
colonel. So I took the company. So you were given
the commandment of the company? That's right. I
was captain at that time. And how many men did you
have under your command? 185. It was a separate
company. It wasn't attached to any regiment. It
wasn't attached to... any higher headquarters we
we went over as a casual company which meant that i
was you know really i was totally in command
without any higher headquarters to look to and you
were in charge then of the of the uh one two seven
four labor uh so that was later this was not it this
was the 519th engineering maintenance oh i see
yeah okay that's the unit that i took to europe okay
So we processed and got on the boat and went to
Europe. And it was a good outfit. What did you think
of finally getting to the war? Here you've been in
America now. You've been in the service for four
years, and you hadn't seen any combat for years.
Well, really and truly, I was, you know, I felt
like, you know...